Staged vs Non-Staged Payloads
Before jumping into specific
shellcode functionality,
we must discuss the distinction between
staged and non-staged shellcode,
as evidenced by these descriptions:
The difference between these
payloads is subtle but important.
A non-staged payload is sent in its
entirety along with the exploit.
In contrast, a staged payload
is usually sent in two parts.
The first part contains a
small primary payload
that causes the victim machine to connect
back to the attacker, transfer a larger
secondary payload containing the rest
of the shellcode, and then execute it.
There are several situations
where we would prefer to use
staged shellcode over non-staged.
If the vulnerability we are exploiting
doesn’t have enough buffer space
to hold a full payload, a staged
payload might be suitable.
Since the first part of a staged payload
is typically smaller than a full payload,
these smaller initial payloads can
likely help us in situations
where space is limited.
In addition, we need to keep in
mind that antivirus software will
quite often detect embedded
shellcode in an exploit.
By replacing that code with a staged
payload, we remove a good chunk of the
malicious part of the shellcode, which
may increase our chances of success.
After the initial stage is initiated
by the exploit, the remaining
payload is injected directly into
the victim machine’s memory.
Note that in Metasploit, the “/”
character is used to denote
whether a payload is staged or not,
so “shell underscore reverse_tcp”
is not staged, whereas
“shell slash reverse_tcp” is.